Rewrite updater guide (#1146)
tauri-apps/tauri-docs: docs/guides/distribution/updater.md

sidebar_position: 5
---

import Command from '@theme/Command'

# Updater

Tauri offers a built-in updater for the MSI (Windows), AppImage (Linux) and App bundle (macOS) distribution formats.

> ## Configuration

Reviewer: I don't think this heading is needed at all especially since there is another one further down called "Tauri Configuration". I think the heading could be removed but keep the content under it.

Author: Yeah you're right. This heading is indeed a bit much.

Once your Tauri project is ready, you can configure Tauri's updater to enable auto updating for your users.

### Signing updates

Tauri's updater has a built-in signature to ensure updates are safe to be installed. This safety measurement can not be turned off.

To sign your updates you need two things:

- The _public key_, which will be added to your `tauri.conf.json` file later, to validate update artifacts before the installation.
- The _private key_, which is used to sign your update artifacts and should NEVER be shared with anyone. Also, if you loose this key, you will NOT be able to publish new updates to your current user base. It is crucial to store it in a safe place where you can always access it.

> To generate the keys, you need to use the Tauri CLI (use `$HOME/.tauri/myapp.key` if you're on Windows):

Reviewer: I think the `use <blah> on Windows` should be moved under the command not before it.

<Command name="signer generate -w ~/.tauri/myapp.key" />

To make Tauri pick up these keys should be set as environment variables when building your app:

- `TAURI_PRIVATE_KEY`: Path or content of your private key

> - `TAURI_KEY_PASSWORD`: Your private key password (optional)

Reviewer: should be moved to the updater artifacts section

sidebar_position: 5
---

import Command from '@theme/Command'

# Updater

Tauri offers a built-in updater for the MSI (Windows), AppImage (Linux) and App bundle (macOS) distribution formats.

Once your Tauri project is ready, you can configure Tauri's updater to enable auto updating for your users.

> ## Signing updates

Reviewer 2: Do we have any consistency between headings being "Capital Case" vs. "Sentence case"? Maybe that's something we could add to the styles section here: https://github.com/tauri-apps/tauri-docs/blob/dev/.github/CONTRIBUTING.md

Author: I think we're try to stick to `Capital Case`, just missed that there. But we never "officially" stated a guideline for that i think.

Reviewer 2: Would you mind sticking that in the style section in this PR? I'm thinking about pulling that into a separate, more detailed doc eventually but will be nice to start capturing things there

Author: sure

> Tauri's updater has a built-in signature to ensure updates are safe to be installed. This safety measurement can not be turned off.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Tauri's updater has a built-in signature to ensure that updates are safe to be installed. This safety measurement cannot be turned off.
```
What's the _why_ behind why you can't turn it off? For security? A technical limitation? I'd expand on this (but very slightly, just added to the sentence).

Author: Well, the actual reason was to force users to actually use the signature (used to be optional) :D Since it wasn't used as much as we liked and because we thought setting it up is fairly simple and quick to do we changed it to be required.

Not sure what to write in the docs though 🤔

Reviewer 2: If that's the case then I'd just remove the last sentence completely.

To sign your updates you need two things:

- The _public key_, which will be added to your `tauri.conf.json` file later, to validate update artifacts before the installation.

> - The _private key_, which is used to sign your update artifacts and should NEVER be shared with anyone. Also, if you loose this key, you will NOT be able to publish new updates to your current user base. It is crucial to store it in a safe place where you can always access it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The _public key_, which will be added to your `tauri.conf.json` file later, to validate update artifacts before the installation.
2. The _private key_, which is used to sign your update artifacts and should NEVER be shared with anyone. Also, if you loose this key, you will NOT be able to publish new updates to your current user base. It is crucial to store it in a safe place where you can always access it.
```

> To generate the keys, you need to use the Tauri CLI:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To generate the keys on Linux and macOS you can use the Tauri CLI:
```

<Command name="signer generate -w ~/.tauri/myapp.key" />

> If you are on Windows, you should use `$HOME/.tauri/myapp.key` instead.

Reviewer 2: I'd explicitly write the out Windows variant in another Command

## Tauri configuration

> Now you need to configure Tauri's updater. To do this, add this to your Tauri config file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you need to configure Tauri's updater. To do this, add this to your Tauri config:
```
I think I'd add some links to the config API docs here (for now just the main page maybe?)

```json title=tauri.conf.json
{
  "tauri": {
    "updater": {
      "active": true,
      "endpoints": [
        "https://releases.myapp.com/{{target}}/{{arch}}/{{current_version}}"
      ],
      "dialog": true,
      "pubkey": "YOUR_UPDATER_SIGNATURE_PUBKEY_HERE"
    }
  }
}
```

> The required keys are `"active"`, `"endpoints"` and `"pubkey"` to enable the updater. `"dialog"` is optional and will default to `true` if not set.

Reviewer 2: There's a LOT of detail for what each of these keys are, the values, etc. I wonder if this information is better to have in the reference docs and link to it there? Helps with future maintainability as well

Author: Yes: https://tauri.app/v1/api/config#updaterconfig.
I don't think removing this section in favor of a link would be beneficial here though to be honest. I added a link to the config object above so hopefully that's enough of a cross ref?

Reviewer 2: Sounds good to me

`"active"` must be a boolean. By default it's set to false.

`"endpoints"` must be an array of updater endpoint URLs as strings. TLS is enforced in production mode.<br/>
Each updater URL can contain the following variables allowing you to determine [server-side](#update-server-json-format) if an update is available:

- `{{current_version}}`: The version of the app that is requesting the update.
- `{{target}}`: The operating system name (one of `linux`, `windows` or `darwin`).
- `{{arch}}`: The architecture of the machine (one of `x86_64`, `i686`, `aarch64` or `armv7`).

`"pubkey"` must be a valid public key generated with Tauri's CLI [above](#signing-updates).

`"dialog"` if present must ba a boolean. By default it's set to true. If enabled, updater [events](#events) will be disabled as the built-in dialog handles everything. If you need custom events, you must turn off the built-in dialog.

## Update artifacts

Tauri's bundler will automatically generate and sign update artifacts once the updater is correctly configured and enabled.

> Before building your app, you need to set environment variables for the private key and password:

Reviewer 2: I'd add a code snippet here of how you set the environment variables

Author: hmm, the problem with that is the amount of different ways to do that and platform inconsistencies 🤔

Author: i added instructions to set the env var for the current session, is that ok? (just pushed it so may need a while to build)

- `TAURI_PRIVATE_KEY`: Path or content of your private key
- `TAURI_KEY_PASSWORD`: Your private key password (optional)

After that, you can run `tauri build` as usual and Tauri will generate the update bundle and its signature.

- **macOS**: On macOS, Tauri will create a `.tar.gz` archive from the application bundle inside the `target/release/bundle/macos/` folder:

  - `myapp.app` - the standard app bundle.
  - `myapp.app.tar.gz` - the updater bundle.
  - `myapp.app.tar.gz.sig` - the signature of the update bundle.

> - **Linux**: On Linux, Tauri will create a `.tar.gz` archive from the AppImage inside the `target/release/bundle/appimage/` folder:

Reviewer 2: Generally I've been trying to sort Linux, macOS and Windows alphabetically to get a bit more consistency

Author: yeah, same actually. Let's not talk about that i thought M comes before L in the alphabet ever again please 😂

  - `myapp.AppImage` - the standard app bundle.
  - `myapp.AppImage.tar.gz` - the updater bundle.
  - `myapp.AppImage.tar.gz.sig` - the signature of the update bundle.

- **Window**: On Windows, Tauri will create a `.zip` archive from the MSI installer inside the `target/release/bundle/msi/` folder:
  - `myapp.msi` - the standard app bundle.
  - `myapp.msi.zip` - the updater bundle.
  - `myapp.msi.zip.sig` - the signature of the update bundle.

The signature can be uploaded and shared safely as long as your private key is secure.

## Server Support

> Tauri's updater supports 2 kinds of servers. You can host a static JSON file on services like S3 or GitHub gists, or host a dynamic update server. The static JSON file is easier to use while an update server will give you finer control over the update mechanism.

Reviewer 2: I'd list out the two kinds it supports and the pros/cons a bit more clearly.
```suggestion
Tauri's updater supports two ways of announcing update data:

 - Static JSON file (to use on services like S3 or GitHub gists)
 - Dynamic update server

The static JSON file is easier to use while a dynamic update server will give you finer control over the update mechanism.
```

### Dynamic Update Server

With this approach, Tauri will follow the update server's instructions. To disable the internal version check you can [overwrite Tauri's version comparison] to always install the version sent by the server. This could be useful if you need to roll back your app version quickly.

> Your server can use variables defined in the `endpoint` url above to determine if an update is required. If you need more data, you can include additional [request headers in Rust] to your liking.

Reviewer 2: Is there a place in the API docs to link to the endpoint object?

Your server should respond with a status code of [`204 No Content`] if there is no update available.

> If an update is required, your server should respond with a status code of [`200 OK`] and a JSON response in this format:

Reviewer 2: Is this expected version documented anywhere else? Or is this the only place?

Author: Only here i think. The updater guide is somewhat of the source of truth for the server side stuff.

```json
{
  "version": "0.2.0",
  "pub_date": "2020-09-18T12:29:53+01:00",
  "url": "https://mycompany.example.com/myapp/releases/myrelease.tar.gz",
  "signature": "Content of the relevant .sig file",
  "notes": "These are some release notes"
}
```

The required keys are "url", "version" and "signature"; the others are optional.

- `"version"` must be a valid semver, with or without a leading `v`, meaning that both `1.0.0` and `v1.0.0` are valid.
- `"url"` must be a valid url to the update bundle.
- `"signature"` must be the **content** of the generated `.sig` file. The signature may change each time you run `tauri build` so make sure to always update it.
- `"notes"`: Here you can add notes about the update, like release notes. Tauri's default dialog will present this to the user when it asks if it's allowed to update.
- `"pub_date"` must be formatted according to [RFC 3339] if present.

> ### Static JSON File

Reviewer 2: If this is the easier of the two I'd move this section above the Dynamic one

> With this approach, Tauri will always request the same JSON file and determine if the app needs to be updated by comparing the version field of the response with the current version. Tauri will expect a response in this format:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this approach, Tauri will always request the same JSON file and determine if the app needs to be updated by comparing the version field of the response with the requesting app's current version. Tauri will expect a response in this format:
```

> ```json

Reviewer 2: Again, is this format anywhere else or only here?

Author: Same as above.

sidebar_position: 5
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs'
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem'
import Command from '@theme/Command'
import updaterDialogImage from '/img/guides/distribution/updater/update-available.png'

# Updater

Tauri offers a built-in updater for the MSI (Windows), AppImage (Linux) and App bundle (macOS) distribution formats.

Once your Tauri project is ready, you can configure Tauri's updater to enable auto updating for your users.

> ## Signing updates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Signing Updates
```

Even added it to the contributing section 😂

Author: fml

Author: eeehhhh, i mean, i obviously just wanted to check how thorough you review my PRs 😂

Reviewer 2: Haha you caught me on a good day 😂

Tauri's updater has a built-in signature mechanism to ensure that updates are safe to be installed.

To sign your updates you need two things:

1. The _public key_, which will be added to your `tauri.conf.json` file later, to validate update artifacts before the installation.
2. The _private key_, which is used to sign your update artifacts and should NEVER be shared with anyone. Also, if you loose this key, you will NOT be able to publish new updates to your current user base. It is crucial to store it in a safe place where you can always access it.

To generate the keys on Linux and macOS you can use the Tauri CLI:

<Command name="signer generate -w ~/.tauri/myapp.key" />

If you are on Windows, you should use `$HOME/.tauri/myapp.key` or a different path of your choice instead:

<Command name="signer generate -w $HOME/.tauri/myapp.key" />

> ## Tauri configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Tauri Configuration
```

      ],
      "dialog": true,
      "pubkey": "YOUR_UPDATER_SIGNATURE_PUBKEY_HERE"
    }
  }
}
```

The required keys are `"active"`, `"endpoints"` and `"pubkey"` to enable the updater. `"dialog"` is optional and will default to `true` if not set.

`"active"` must be a boolean. By default it's set to false.

`"endpoints"` must be an array of updater endpoint URLs as strings. TLS is enforced in production mode.<br/>
Each updater URL can contain the following variables allowing you to determine [server-side](#update-server-json-format) if an update is available:

- `{{current_version}}`: The version of the app that is requesting the update.
- `{{target}}`: The operating system name (one of `linux`, `windows` or `darwin`).
- `{{arch}}`: The architecture of the machine (one of `x86_64`, `i686`, `aarch64` or `armv7`).

`"pubkey"` must be a valid public key generated with Tauri's CLI [above](#signing-updates).

`"dialog"` if present must ba a boolean. By default it's set to true. If enabled, updater [events](#events) will be disabled as the built-in dialog handles everything. If you need custom events, you must turn off the built-in dialog.

> ### Installmode on Windows

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### `Installmode` on Windows
```

On Windows there is an additional config [`"installMode"`](../../api/config.md#updaterwindowsconfig.installmode) to change how the update is installed.

- `"passive"`: The default and general recommendation. It will show a small progress bar when installing the update without requiring any user interaction.
- `"basicUI"`: There will be a basic user interface shown which requires user interaction to finish the installation.
- `"quiet"`: There will be no progress feedback to the user. With this mode the installer cannot request admin privileges by itself so it only works in user-wide installations or when your app itself already runs with admin privileges. Generally not recommended.

> ## Update artifacts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Update Artifacts
```

- `"url"` must be a valid url to the update bundle.
- `"signature"` must be the **content** of the generated `.sig` file. The signature may change each time you run `tauri build` so make sure to always update it.
- `"notes"`: Here you can add notes about the update, like release notes. Tauri's default dialog will present this to the user when it asks if it's allowed to update.
- `"pub_date"` must be formatted according to [RFC 3339] if present.

Note that Tauri will validate the _whole_ file before checking the version field, so make sure all existing platform configurations are valid and complete.

## Checking for Updates

### Built-in dialog

By default, the updater uses a built-in dialog API from Tauri. The dialog will only check for a new update when the app was just launched or when you manually [emit](../../api/js/event.md#emit) the `"tauri://update"` event.

![New Update](https://i.imgur.com/UMilB5A.png)

The dialog release notes are represented by the update `notes` provided by the [server](#server-support).
If the user accepts, the update is downloaded and installed. Afterwards, the user is prompted to restart the application.

> ### Custom stuff

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Custom Dialog and Logic
```

Author: whoops

:::caution

> You need to disable the built-in dialog in your [Tauri configuration](#configuration) to enable the JavaScript APIs and updater events!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to disable the built-in dialog in your [Tauri configuration](#tauri-configuration) to enable the JavaScript APIs and updater events!
```

      "url": "https://github.com/username/reponame/releases/download/v1.0.0/app-x64.msi.zip"
    }
  }
}
```

The required keys are `"version"`, `"platforms.[target].url"` and `"platforms.[target].signature"`; the others are optional.

- `"version"` must be a valid semver, with or without a leading `v`, meaning that both `1.0.0` and `v1.0.0` are valid.
- `"platforms"`: Each platform key is in the `OS-ARCH` format, where `OS` is one of `linux`, `darwin` or `windows`, and `ARCH` is one of `x86_64`, `aarch64`, `i686` or `armv7`.
- `"url"` must be a valid url to the update bundle.
- `"signature"` must be the **content** of the generated `.sig` file. The signature may change each time you run `tauri build` so make sure to always update it.
- `"notes"`: Here you can add notes about the update, like release notes. Tauri's default dialog will present this to the user when it asks if it's allowed to update.
- `"pub_date"` must be formatted according to [RFC 3339] if present.

Note that Tauri will validate the _whole_ file before checking the version field, so make sure all existing platform configurations are valid and complete.

## Checking for Updates

### Built-in dialog

> By default, the updater uses a built-in dialog API from Tauri. The dialog will only check for a new update when the app was just launched or when you manually [emit](../../api/js/event.md#emit) the `"tauri://update"` event.

Reviewer 2: Maybe link to the dialog API?

Author: So, we somewhat regularly get asked if we can expose the built-in updater dialog so that devs can re-use that for their own updater flow (p.s. i agree that this is a good idea) and i wonder if linking to the normal dialog api would suggest that it's the same thing? I hope you get what i'm trying to say.

Reviewer 2: Yup makes sense. I'd rephrase to say "Tauri shows a dialog" or something a little more generic to hopefully reduce the confusion?

> ![New Update](https://i.imgur.com/UMilB5A.png)

Reviewer 2: Host images in the repo instead of imgur please :)

The dialog release notes are represented by the update `notes` provided by the [server](#server-support).
If the user accepts, the update is downloaded and installed. Afterwards, the user is prompted to restart the application.

### Custom Dialog and Logic

:::caution

> You need to disable the built-in dialog in your [Tauri configuration](#tauri-configuration) to enable the JavaScript APIs and updater events!

Reviewer 2: Is there a more specific place to point to here?

Author: Either the tauri config section in the guide, or the `dialog` property in config.md. In this case i'd be fine with both

:::

#### Rust

> Please see the updater module documentation at [docs.rs] for the Rust API.

Reviewer 2: I'd link to the specific module

Author: We do actually, it links to https://docs.rs/tauri/latest/tauri/updater/index.html

#### JavaScript

> For the complete API docs see [here](../../api/js/updater.md). An example using the JS APIs could look like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the complete API docs see [here](../../api/js/updater.md). An example using the JavaScript API looks like this:
```

```js title=updater.ts
import {
  checkUpdate,
  installUpdate,
  onUpdaterEvent,
} from '@tauri-apps/api/updater'
import { relaunch } from '@tauri-apps/api/process'

const unlisten = await onUpdaterEvent(({ error, status }) => {
  // This will log all updater events, including status updates and errors.
  console.log('Updater event', error, status)
})

try {
  const { shouldUpdate, manifest } = await checkUpdate()

  if (shouldUpdate) {
    // You could show a dialog asking the user if they want to install the update here.
    console.log(
      `Installing update ${manifest?.version}, ${manifest?.date}, ${manifest?.body}`
    )

    // Install the update. This will also restart the app on Windows!

>     await installUpdate()

Reviewer 2: Technical question, but why is this different behaviour on platforms? If there's no reason then I think this should be opened as an issue in Tauri

Author: On windows the app needs to be closed to be able to install the new version with the MSI installer. I'm not sure if that can be worked around.

Reviewer 2: Doesn't really matter for this PR I guess, was just a weird inconsistency between OSs where `installUpdate()` DOES restart on Windows but then for macOS and Linux you have to do a separate command to get the same functionality 🤷‍♂️

Maybe something to think about for the API re-write

Author: yeah, there are a lot of quirks in the updater that need a bit refinement.

Your server should respond with a status code of [`204 No Content`] if there is no update available.

If an update is required, your server should respond with a status code of [`200 OK`] and a JSON response in this format:

```json
{
  "version": "0.2.0",
  "pub_date": "2020-09-18T12:29:53+01:00",
  "url": "https://mycompany.example.com/myapp/releases/myrelease.tar.gz",
  "signature": "Content of the relevant .sig file",
  "notes": "These are some release notes"
}
```

The required keys are "url", "version" and "signature"; the others are optional.

- `"version"` must be a valid semver, with or without a leading `v`, meaning that both `1.0.0` and `v1.0.0` are valid.
- `"url"` must be a valid url to the update bundle.
- `"signature"` must be the **content** of the generated `.sig` file. The signature may change each time you run `tauri build` so make sure to always update it.
- `"notes"`: Here you can add notes about the update, like release notes. Tauri's default dialog will present this to the user when it asks if it's allowed to update.
- `"pub_date"` must be formatted according to [RFC 3339] if present.

## Checking for Updates

> ### Built-in dialog

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Built-In Dialog
```

By default, the updater shows a dialog using Tauri's [dialog.ask](../../api/js/dialog.md#ask) API internally. The dialog will only check for a new update when the app was just launched or when you manually [emit](../../api/js/event.md#emit) the `"tauri://update"` event.

<img src={updaterDialogImage} alt="Default updater dialog" style={{maxHeight: "200px", textAlign: 'center'}} />

The dialog release notes are represented by the update `notes` provided by the [server](#server-support).
If the user accepts, the update is downloaded and installed. Afterwards, the user is prompted to restart the application.

> ### Custom Dialog and Logic

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Custom Dialog
```
